next the future of the two-party system
a panel of political scholars talks at
the Institute of policy studies this is
about an hour hello and welcome to
defining the issues a biweekly series
sponsored by the institute for policy
studies i'm sarah anderson of the
institute for policy studies and we are
the nation's oldest multi-issue
progressive think tank and today we're
going to be talking about the Republican
National Convention as delegates are
arriving in New York City there has
already been a lot of press coverage of
this event but I'd have to say I think
most of it has focused on the not so
substantive issues one story we've been
following closely here at IPS is the
Battle of the grass you might know that
this has to do with our allies United
for peace and justice and their struggle
for many months to try to get a permit
for an anti-war demonstration in New
York City's Central Park unfortunately
local officials there have decided it's
more important to protect the grass than
it is to protect freedom of speech
there's also been a lot of coverage of
the security fortress that's being
erected in New York City to protect the
delegates and then of course there's
been the coverage of the dizzying array
of celebrities that are converging in
New York City to show their support for
the Grand Old Party and you can imagine
why it's a little hard to focus on the
series political matters when the likes
of Wayne Newton or bo Derek might pop up
at any minute today though seriously at
IPS we're going to focus on the serious
stuff the serious political substantive
issues and we're going to go beyond the
glitz and the glamour the security
hysteria to do this we're going to look
at what the Republican Party really
stands for or at least what they say
they stand for in their official
platform we're going to look at
comparing contrasting the Republican
platform with a Democratic one this is a
follow up to discussion we had earlier
on the Democratic party platform and
we'll also then look at
this two-party system that we are living
under is it really working for the
American people is this the best
democracy that we can have and where is
it going joining us today are two of the
country's most astute political scholars
here is Andy Levine a professor of the
University of Wisconsin and also an
adjunct professor at the University of
Maryland he is the author of American
ideology engaging political philosophy
Hobbes to Rawls as well as rethinking
liberal equality we're also joined by my
colleague Marcus Raskin he co-founded
this organization the institute for
policy studies in 1963 after a stint
with the Kennedy administration more
recently he's the author of liberalism
the genius of American ideals and here
at IPS he also directs the past for the
21st century project which is producing
a multi-volume work trying to learn the
lessons from the past century I also
want to welcome our listeners on
pacifica radio as well as our viewers on
c-span I'm going to start out with a few
questions from our grass you can because
I think given his experience with the
Kennedy administration and also as a
very close observer of presidencies over
the years he can help us understand what
is a political platform what is the
importance of it is there any importance
to it is this something that is really a
blueprint for political parties that
they actually follow in in detail or is
it something that these delegates in New
York and at previous conventions just
toss in the garbage can as they're on
their way out of the Convention and no
one ever pays any attention to it so
mark if you can help us understand
really the significance of these
platforms well thank you of fourth a
place to begin believe it or not as in
1840 with Martin Van Buren which
apparently is the first party platform
and it ran a thousand words and it was
committed to several positions one
position was that the federal government
should be weak
second that you had to watch out for a
national bank and be against it because
the people who would end up running the
country would be the rich and you always
had to guard against them the third
position was that states rights which
meant that you should that abolitionists
who were then on the move could be
controlled locally by each of the states
that is by the southern states
especially so that was the position they
came from also it was one of the first
of party conventions of a more major
party more major party and it reflected
Van Buren's view that you had to
rationalize the party system which until
that I was a very which was a ragged
system before them in fact in the
Federalist Papers that the notion wasn't
that one of the great dangers was
factions and Madison made that argument
about factions and and on the other hand
what you had to do was balance off the
factions and so this came to be
rationalized that in the context of
political parties but that it is to
pursue that from what happened is that
parties then began looking for some
coherence to their point of view which
is very very hard to find because it was
still comprised of various factions
themselves so that the usually it's been
the case that party platforms are
compromises the ones that usually are
not compromises our small parties that
is parties that our breakaway parties
from the two major parties or those who
have a much stronger ideological cast
that isn't to say that the two major
parties don't and as will come to
develop the argument we'll see how
indeed they have a very very strong
ideological cast and I'm sure Andy will
speak to that as well
can you think of examples though where
information in the platform was not
followed well I can think of one case
there are many cases of course but one
case which is especially interesting to
this generation and to the Vietnam
generation as you read the 1964 platform
when Lyndon Johnson rule he was a very
very strong candidate he later got
sixty-two percent of the vote against
against Barry Goldwater the first
several pages of that platform are given
over to peace and how them the most
important thing that any nation and any
national government can do is to assure
the piece is to develop those programs
that are sure peace and one example that
he gave for that purpose was the signing
of the nuclear test ban arrangement
which was done under President Kennedy
to show that this was a party of peas
well within three years the fact was
that 1967 came along and he lost he
didn't lose the the nomination there but
in New Hampshire but he lost who he lost
enough votes in against McCarthy there
to drop out of the race and part of the
reason in my view that he dropped out of
the race was a substantial number of the
people in the Democratic Party were
anti-war and had remembered the
realities of that particular party
platform now you of course have other
cases where just to clarify so they
declared they were absolutely committed
to peace and then shortly before getting
into the PNL more exactly they with that
was their purpose they were committed to
peace now there were contradictions in
that platform and indeed you still see
that in the Democratic platform we're
number one we're going to stay number
one nobody's going to push us around
we've
increased our armaments and so forth and
so on so that you have both things going
on at the same time but the
extraordinary thing is the language of
that platform which in effect made the
point in order to rebuild or have a
Great Society you had to have peace that
was the underlying context so they were
saber rattling at the same time that
they were talking peace well what else
can have you learned you think looking
at platforms over time about history can
you can you see a consistency about
history and in looking at political
platforms well I think you can see a
consistency of the problems that we face
one problem always which is present in
one form or another and is war and
preparation for war and expansion that's
really been there since the beginning of
the United States whether it was against
the Indians whether it was the Civil War
whether it was post 1898 and the
spanish-american war and so forth
there's always an addressing to the
question of war because we are either in
war or preparing for war a second thing
which is always there in different forms
is the question of race first is the
question of slavery than its question of
race neyo slavery it then also begins to
be transformed into the issue of poor vs
rich which we can talk about that's
always present so the class then is part
of that class issues are also always
there in one form or another for example
in nineteen thirty in the 1930s that was
a fundamental issue for the New Deal
even a Russian say even in the 1948
platform of Truman this was a very
important issue against Wall Street and
so forth which was picked up in order to
co-opt the position taken by the Henry
Wallace progressives so that's always
been there as well as part of it there's
a fourth piece
this which is national triumphalism we
are the greatest nation in the world we
are there's nobody like us we are the
mansion on the hill and so forth and so
on and so there's always a form of
patriotism in some cases it ends up into
nationalist patriotism almost a fascist
type of thing but mostly it's just
patriotism and pride in the United
States that pride also comes from
another thing it comes from the swearing
of allegiance to the United States
because you will recall that with the
Civil War it wasn't the case that at
first nine and thirteen states were were
swearing allegiance to the United States
so patriotism then became defined in
terms of that form of swearing
allegiance it's not enough to just say
you're the best party or you have the
best candidate but we have to be the
best country in the world well thanks
for those historical insights let's turn
now to the political platforms of this
election year here in 2004 a lot of
people on the political left complain a
lot that the two parties the two
dominant parties are identical that
there really aren't significant
differences there and you know looking
at the platform so I have to say a
number of distinctions did jump out at
me and so I'd like to just us identify a
number of them one is abortion rights
the Republicans say they want a
constitutional ban on abortion the
Democrats say they proudly stand by a
woman's right to choose there's the gay
rights issue Republicans again won a
constitutional ban on legal unions for
same-sex couples in the platform they go
even further to say they don't want gay
partners to share in employee benefits
the Democrats on the other hand say they
want full inclusion and benefits for gay
and lesbian families on trade policy
which is something that I work on a lot
i have to say i am actually kind of
surprised to see that the democrats did
a pretty decent job of reflecting the
concerns of labor unions
environmentalists other groups that have
very strongly opposed our current trade
policies the Republicans on the other
hand are rah rah for the status quo I'd
say on environment the Democrats really
come out as being much more advanced in
their positions and supporting renewable
energy and so forth and just one other
point on Social Security the Republicans
have said that they are in favor of at
least partially privatizing Social
Security and the Democrats have said
they are against that and so just these
are a few examples of where I see strong
distinctions in the platforms is that
enough for people to feel that American
voters do have a choice in this election
well again I think question is the
hierarchy of interest of a particular
voter in other words if you are gay and
you're for gay union gay marriage you're
definitely going to go to the Democrats
the position taken by the Republicans
when they ask for constitutional
amendments know very well that those I
would guess cannot become constitutional
amendments because they have to go
through the states they have to go
through Congress and there would be just
too much grading so in a sense this is i
watch as far as I'm concerned now with
regard to the environment i think you're
right i think there is a profound
difference i would say that the purpose
of the democrats will be to undo some of
the things that have been done over the
course of the last few years that i
think is fairly clear in terms of who it
is that they'll bring in to those
particular jobs so i would say that that
where you're describing there is a very
big difference there's a very big
difference with regard to social
security where the interest is of and
it's been a long term one of the
Republican Party really not to have a
social security system on the grounds
that somehow Social Security system
would bow
both protect people who probably
shouldn't be protective that is the poor
and the not so poor and furthermore that
it is an invasion into the rights of the
individual to invest his or her own
money the theory there being again that
one generation should not take care of
another generation but it also
misunderstands the way the Social
Security system operates well speaking
of the poor I need to point out one
similarity I noticed in both of the
platforms which is that I think they
both pretty much ignore the poor the
Democratic platform has a big section on
the great American middle class and that
is really their focus with maybe a few
exceptions and the focus of the
Republicans as well is on the middle
class and not the poor and I guess we
can all be safe and assuming that a big
part of the explanation for that is
because the poor votes in you know less
percentage numbers than people in other
income groups and so they feel like they
do not need to take that part of our
population as seriously and I'm
wondering from your perspective if you
think hasn't always been that way how
the dominant parties always pretty much
ignored the interests of the poor the
answer I think is no there always has
been at least in the 20th century
interest in individual striving so for
example would will Woodrow Wilson talks
about the striving the individual to
become part of the middle class to the
big phrase of course has always been to
be self-made so that's been part of the
lore of the the American society that
were self-made individuals are self-made
they don't have any help from anybody
and so forth and so on of the change
however big time comes again in the New
Deal and hear the argument is you can't
have nation which is one-third ill house
they'll close
poor etc and then by 1945 at the end of
the Second World War you have certain
very interesting and important things
happening you have well over 16 million
people than in the Armed Forces they
come back into the into American society
and the fear is they're going to come
back the fear of government is they will
come back into a society where there
were twenty percent unemployed and you
can imagine having the return of so many
millions of men and william women who
were faced unemployment it would be a
situation very similar to what happened
in Germany after the First World War so
the position that was taken by a
president roosevelt in his last address
to his last economic report to congress
was a bill of rights for everybody in
that bill of rights started not from the
position of the bill of rights for the
middle class the Bill of economic rights
for the middle class but a billet
economic rights for everybody in that
context being the right to housing the
right to a job the right to education
etc notice always these are rights
they're not necessarily something that
you have in terms of entitlement charity
not charity so just to finish the point
in terms of Clinton Clinton came forward
said Bill of economic rights for the
middle class and again this pushed down
the concern of the poor and the lower
middle class in ways that they're hidden
well thank you very much Marcus rasca
and I have more questions for you but
I'll hold them to later and move now to
Andy Levine again Andy is a professor at
the University of Wisconsin as well as
an adjunct professor at the University
of Maryland and he's going to share his
thoughts on the history and future of
the Republican Party and the two-party
system and where we're headed well I
want to ask a question that might seem
rather odd i want to ask whether the GOP
will survive until two thousand and
I think it's a fair question to ask what
is sure is that a struggle is under way
in which the party itself is at stake
and that in that context the Republican
old guard the prosperous and
upper-middle classes are losing ground
it's precisely that old guard along with
so-called moderates who think as they do
that the Democrats want to win over
indeed for many in the Democratic Party
is evidenced in their platform and in
their electoral politics since their
convention it seems that their
allegiance is even more desired and
victory itself Republicans and Democrats
need one another for the Democrats the
need is so acute that if the Republican
Party did not exist it would be
necessary for them to invent it the
party of the lesser evil requires the
specter of a greater evil still in our
electoral duopoly only Republicans can
play that role for Democrats indeed if
there is any other reason to be for the
Democrats in 2004 it is subtle or well
hidden this is why John Kerry is the
perfect standard bearer for the
Democrats for the Democratic Party today
his selection was warranted by one thing
only that among the relevant
alternatives he seemed to the majority
of Democratic voters the most likely to
keep Bush at bay the Democratic Party
has always drawn votes from an
improbable mix of constituencies even
before Bill Clinton moved the party
several orders of magnitude to the right
it was lesser evil ISM that held it
together leading genuine liberals and
trade unionists to find common ground
with segregationists and social
conservatives back then when there
really was a Democratic wing of the
Democratic Party that wasn't thoroughly
marginalized the Republicans presented a
more coherent picture theirs was the
party of big business but it was also
the party of mainstream Protestant
America the robber barons and the
farmers of the Midwest had at least that
much in common shared material interests
were scanned but cultural affinities
joined Republican voters together that
world is gone and its absence is
registered in our political
I for at least the past quarter-century
the so-called Reagan Revolution marked
its consummation it was in that period
that the Grand Old Party came to rely
for votes on radical evangelicals hyper
Zionists socially conservative Catholics
libertarians and like-minded proponents
of voodoo economics fiscal conservatives
Leo isolationists and Teddy Roosevelt
style imperialists in comparison the
Democrats seem almost homogeneous
elements of the Republican old guard may
be drawn to voodoo economics and at the
extremes libertarianism and there are
certainly fiscal conservatives neo
isolationists and imperialists among
them but however useful they may be they
have little in common with impoverished
Protestant fundamentalists conservative
working-class Catholics and uppity
right-wing Jews they have been
extraordinarily adept however at
manipulating the convictions of these
constituencies and using them for their
own benefit a phenomenon brilliantly
documented in Thomas Frank's new book
what's the matter with Kansas with the
survial media in hand they have proven
right the dictum of the greatest
Republican of all that you can fool some
of the people all of the time however as
Lincoln also observed there are limits
to how much the people can be fooled
because reality always intrudes so far
though reality has been kept at bay how
is that possible the short answer is
that the GOP stumbled upon the method
the Democrats pioneered they found a
greater evil but for Republicans to make
lesser evil ISM work for them they had
first to set American politics on a new
course they had to change the
conversation the Democrats were more
than willing to oblige in an electoral
duopoly there can only be two lesser
evil parties if there's some dimension
along which parties cluster in a
polarized way this would be the case
whenever parties can be arrayed along
the left-right spectrum then those on
the Left would see the rightmost
alternative is the greatest evil and
vice versa until quite recently such a
spectrum that exists more or less within
our two parties as much as between them
in brief the left was egalitarian the
right was not
since those who stand to gain from
egalitarian redistribution outnumber
those who stand to lose and since our
two parties actively conspired to
marginalize independent and third-party
candidacies and since the Republican
Party no longer has a liberal wing just
an increasingly anxious old guard and
some fellow travelling moderates there
is no way for it to induce the majority
or even a plurality of voters to vote
for it on the basis of material
interests there for so long as
distribution is the issue the Democratic
Party can play the role of greater evil
only for a small minority of very
well-off voters fortunately for the
Republicans though some influential
Democrats got it into their heads around
the time that Reagan and Bush assumed
office that the way forward for them was
to abandon or rather to marginalize the
party's Democratic wing in an effort to
win over moderates and old guard
Republicans this was not completely
unreasonable where else could
traditional democratic constituencies go
moreover the way to implement this
strategy was easy and obvious all the
Democrats had to do was remain liberal
on the so-called wedge issues the ones
the Republicans were already using to
entice legions of have-nots into voting
against their own interests thus a new
left right spectrum came into being
based more on what pundits call values
than interests this has become the
terrain on which our elections today are
fought it goes without saying that this
change of focus works to the advantage
of the beneficiaries of the system in
place because it takes redistribution
off the table the problem that the
fortunate few now face is to secure what
they have achieved by keeping the
conversation stalled where it is in this
endeavor the Democrats are on board Shen
Eddie should anyone from that parties
now in significant Democratic wings
suggest otherwise John Kerry recently
took pains to remind the voting
like that he emphatically he is not a
redistributionist in deciding to become
the party of well-off voters who cannot
stomach fundamentalists the Democrats
are rather the New Democrats as they
started calling themselves in the 1980s
didn't just help Republicans change the
conversation they handed them a foil for
every reactionary sentiment that had
accumulated since the New Deal the old
Democratic coalition minus the solid
South but with a bit of already
disaffected moderate support in
recompense was still sufficiently robust
to elect bill clinton president twice in
the 1990s but for a variety of reasons
not least is manifest in authenticity
and opportunism clinton was a leader who
was easy to despise it required no vast
right-wing conspiracy to turn him into a
target of cultural resentment though it
didn't hurt that there was a well-funded
when operating in the wings Fanning the
flames thus there came to be if not
exactly a greater evil than its
functional equivalent hatred of the
Clintons and of what they came to
represent to boaters alienated by
changes in 20th century mores sufficed
to cement the Republicans new unholy
alliance nowadays of course Clinton is
history in 2000 al gore was still
tarnished by the association much as he
tried not to be but John Kerry is no
Bill Clinton to turn him into a target
of resentment the vast right-wing
conspiracy will have to work overtime it
seems it has already begun still one can
only wonder how defenders of george w
bush and the chickenhawks his selection
empowered can accuse anyone much less
kerry of fabricating credentials for
being a war president is that much
what's possible evidently so at least
for now but mass delusions correct
themselves eventually the Republican
Party is just fractious enough that
maybe this time the correction will come
before it is too late for one thing win
or lose in November conjuncture all
factors weigh heavily against the
Republican Party no one ever expected
much from george w bush but his father's
quote cronies and protges were a
different or a different matter however
once in power to everyone's amazement
they have governed with unsurpassed
ineptitude despite the taint of the
legitimacy that afflicted the bush
administration in his first happier it
was after all installed by Bush family
cronies they pushed forward with their
own reedus redistributionist agenda
redistributing from the poor to the rich
then shamelessly exploiting the
opportunities handed them by 911 they
plunged recklessly ahead targeting not
just the vestiges of the new deal but
Progressive Era reforms to buy almost
any measure in almost every way they
have proven themselves utterly incapable
they've wreaked havoc on our economy
despite an upturn in the business cycle
they've involved the country in two
disastrous never-ending Wars they've
struck profound if not fatal blows at
alliances that had endured for
generations they've undermined civil
liberties they put the country at risk
of terrorist attacks now and in the
future to a degree that was unthinkable
before and although the Democrats are
too cowardly to make an issue of it
they've committed the highest of crimes
and misdemeanors they lied the country
into war it's hard to imagine how any
self-interested member of our economic
elite could keep faith with these
bunglers especially when there is at
hand a competent rival either to step in
and do them service many of them are no
doubt louvre by greed they know from
experience that there is almost nothing
the bush administration won't do for
them but how can they be so myopic can't
they see that they really do need a
state that functions as their Executive
Committee that forces them to forbear
from seeking immediate advantages in
order to keep the system afloat some do
this is why many among them are
defecting one can only feel embarrassed
for the rest the Democrats are plainly
counting on the enlightened
self-interest at the very very rich to
overcome that congenital loyalty to the
Republican Party that keeps them in the
bush camp it could happen despite its
best efforts to the contrary the Bush
administration is pushing them away
there's a psychological dimension to in
the New Democrat strategy some
malefactors of great wealth like Bush
himself are smugly and different to what
anyone
a narrow circle of like-minded people
think but the vast majority of moderate
voters are of a different cast of mind
the kerry campaign knows this it was a
theme of their Boston Convention they
know that minus a few arrogant fools our
elites and those who think like them are
as insecure culturally as we're their
counterparts in the Gilded Age and
therefore that there are many among them
who in their hearts are uncomfortable
with the commander in chief whom the
whole world knows to be a laughingstock
this sensibility could become a factor
with which to reckon beneficiaries of
Republican policies have deeper
structural reasons to to be anxious
about the course their party is taking
even if cultural resentments too old
today's Republican voting bloc together
the Republican electorate has as much
reason to resent other Republican voters
as anyone else can support for the
Israeli right keep Christian Zionists
who seek to hasten the conversion of the
Jews and Armageddon in the same camp as
neocon the code Knicks who can barely
conceal their contempt well opposition
to abort abortion and open homosexuality
keep Protestant evangelicals forever
aligned with Catholic social
conservatives followers of the
Antichrist and what of the poor
libertarians in this age of Ashcroft and
with social conservatism riding high
they become as marginalized within the
Republican Party as progressives are in
the party of the lesser evil it's no
surprise therefore that the Libertarian
Party is poised in 2004 to draw more
than a few votes away from george w bush
to be sure the libertarians agree with
other constituencies in the Republican
electorate the taxes should be cut and
Social Services restricted for them
unlike the others this is even a
principled conviction but since it is
only the well-to-do who stand to benefit
from such policies one can only wonder
how long unity can endure on this basis
inveterate snobbishness matters too it
is why I and evidently also the kerry
campaign think the affections are more
likely at the top at least in the short
run that at the bottom the class
composition of the republican electorate
is shifting it may already have tipped
to the point that the lower orders now
run the show if kerry is the emblematic
democrat george w bush epitomizes this
additional state of affairs descended on
both sides from families that insinuated
themselves into the highest reaches of
the Eastern aristocracy a graduate of
Andover and Yale he sounds acts and
things like a new bow like a nouveau
riche Texas oilman caricaturing with
every gesture and remarked the mores of
the good people his family and their ilk
have bled dry for generations he comes
on as a good old boy but this is opposed
it isn't easily reproducible in a
politician playing it capable of playing
a national role as but bushes by an
accident of birth even brother Jeb
doesn't quite cut it before long without
a suitable figure whose personality
somehow holds it all together the
Republicans will have to go one way or
the other and the old guard and the
moderates already know which way it will
be the Republican Party today reflects
and magnifies the polarization of
America's class structure everywhere
thanks largely to Republican policies
and democratic acquiescence the very
rich get richer at the expense of
everyone else because they understand
how their privileges are sustained the
old guard and the so-called moderates
are content for now with this
arrangement but they can't like it much
this is why it is likely that at some
point maybe sooner than we think they'll
have had enough if Bush doesn't
embarrass them sufficiently to push them
into the welcoming Democratic fold his
supporters will Bill Clinton the New
Democrat felt the pain of those on whom
he afflicted it but in the end he'd
rather hang out with the rich and famous
or failing that with ordinary people
blessed by fortune so too would the rest
of them why else would they assume the
mantle of the Republican Party of
yesteryear before their get their wet
they get their way though they have a
lot of electoral inertia to overcome but
as the Bush administration wrecks
everything it touches and as it
encourages the rabble to take control
the counter force may prove irresistible
the present GOP leadership ones very
much to resist this eventuality they're
aware to that the old guard is not yet
ready a southern segregationists were
three decades ago to change party
affiliations their intent on taking
advantage
this resistance to change ends a
platform that taken at its word is in
most respects no more reactionary and if
anything a tad less pious than the
Democrats unlike the Democratic platform
which was controlled by the Kerry
campaign and which therefore provides a
good indication of what the Democrats in
power will do the Republican platform
provides hardly any indication at all
the role of the platform instead is to
remind the old guard that the party is
not just for them it is also still of
them thus the platform is prey to that
is paraded out in the same spirit as our
people of color at their conventions or
moderates such as Giuliani McCain and
Arnold Schwarzenegger the idea is to
reassure the voters the Democrats those
voters that the Democrats want to win
over that the Republican Party still
belongs to them and that it is still
moderate at its core the problem of the
GOP is that these PR gestures fly too
much in the face of reality from a
strictly electoral point of view it
would make more sense for Democrats to
go after the electorate that doesn't
vote at all the half of the electorate
that doesn't vote at all and to try to
win over prosperous but anxious
Republicans and moderate independence
and insofar as the Republican electorate
is up for grabs it would make more sense
to go after the part of it that
embarrasses the old guard than to go
after the old guard itself but the
Democrats are loath to do anything of
the sort because it would alienate their
corporate paymasters so what one might
ask if the idea is only to raise money
to get elected but that isn't the only
idea at least not for the Democrats
there isn't enough percentage in it
there are perks that go along with being
a party of the privileged perks that go
beyond the spoils of electoral office
itself small wonder then the Democrats
especially New Democrats look at the
respectable remnant of the Republican
Party increasingly alienated from its
base and at the prosperous prosperous
moderates who usually vote with them and
ask why not us with the Republican Party
embodying so many contradictions it is
not an unreasonable question the demise
of the Republican Party or if not
a significant reconfiguration would be a
mixed blessing but it does present an
opportunity of a kind that has not
existed for decades it is the
conventional wisdom that the coming
election will be close I confess I can't
see how even the combined forces of
James Baker Karl Rove and Osama bin
Laden can save George Bush now but even
if Kerry only wins by a hair the
restoration of the lesser evil party
will come as a relief for the world and
for most Americans to it will delay and
perhaps even a verte impending
catastrophes brought on or accelerated
by the shortsightedness and ineptitude
of the current administration win or
lose though the time is now to start to
seize the opportunities that impending
changes in party alignments will bring
who knows but perhaps soon we will be
able to move beyond lesser evil ism all
together and beyond the institutional
arrangements electoral and otherwise
that make it our best hope perhaps we
can build a party that is genuinely not
just nominally Republican and Democratic
a party of the vast disenfranchised
majority thank you Andy Lavine for that
very creative if not depressing
description of our current political
system one question I want to throw out
to mark Raskin and he can maybe address
this in his comments as well as to the
audience's how do we move beyond lesser
evil ISM you know can we hope that there
will be real change in our political
system here someone pointed out the
other day or argued that really the only
time in our history in this country
we've had a third party rise to power
was the Republican Party as a result of
the ruptures during the Civil War and
argued that it takes that level of
social upheaval in this country for
anything like that to ever happen so we
can pretty much forget about it for the
near future on the other hand you look
at countries that have changed their
political system I've read a little bit
about you know New Zealand they switched
from having a british-style election
system to a proportional representation
one it can be done in other countries is
it possible here and and how could we do
it mark Raskin would you like to
respond first and then we'll take a few
questions from the audience I think
first of all obviously it's very hard
secondly you do have to look for a
systemic break in the organizing of a
structure so that enough people leave
that structures they were going to move
in another way and if those people
usually have to come from different
classes together and that's kind of the
history of what's what happened in
Europe it's not necessarily the history
of what happened in the United States in
the great agrarian period in the 20th
century the systemic break came at the
in my view Vietnam War period in which
it was clear that we were engaged in a
impossible war and it made no sense and
a people understood that there was there
were a lot of nuclear weapons around and
they could all go off and somehow the
system itself was not speaking to that
question and that at that time you had
what worked and he's talking about you
had a democratic party which was made up
of City bosses in the major cities
southern racists intellectual and labor
bosses and they could hardly hold and
hold themselves together and labor
during that period favored the war it
had labored not favored the war that
would have resulted in a very great
change in American in American life
indeed wherever was the case in the 20th
century for the labor unions to in fact
come forward and support a third party
they didn't and the fact that they did
not have
that the parties did not have the small
parties did not have the support of
labor unions greatly narrowed the
possibility for any change one of the
things listening to Professor Levine's
speak which is I think very important to
remember and this is a mild tumor is
that the parties themselves now are
quite protium that is to say they can
take whatever shape anybody wants them
to take as a result of a communication
system which keeps hammering a
propaganda system which keeps hammering
at the most simple-minded ideas and
slogans and people just keep at them an
actor who who are part of this
propaganda machine you saw this really
in in the 1930s in Germany and in the
late twenties where certain people
understood that if you keep hammering at
the same slogans and you make believe
that somehow there are scapegoats or
that there's a misunderstanding of who's
really at fault and so forth but that
then can enforce the the anger of people
to move very far over to extremes but
especially far over to the right that's
what happened in Germany in this country
the question of is tied to now is tied
to the fact that we have a war system in
a national security system that we don't
seem to be able to get out of as you
read the two party platforms each one
attempts I'll do the other in terms of
war making possibilities and continuing
as a war continuing war as a basic way
of life in America and also as a basic
economic system for the country the
defense system for the second is the
fact that international capitalism has
is is neither regulated by the national
States by the United States force the
American corporations or the United
Nations and that there are movements now
in the world of course that want to
confront this but they're nowhere near
as strong for that to occur so one major
issue in American life for a political
party the struggle can go on either
outside the political party inside it in
demonstrations in small groups is the
need to address two fundamental ideas
the international corporation and its
that where it's going and the national
security state there are other issues
which can in fact be dealt with in the
present system in my view one is a
health system another as a protection of
Social Security of third yard is
providing a greater child care and so
forth and so on but the basic issues the
basic issues of this period are not
being dealt with well we could open it
up for questions from the audience if
anyone would like to jump in right here
can we bring the microphone oh go ahead
please Oh does it make intellectual or
any kind of sense to you as far as the
way the reform party has moved in the
last decade from ross perot to jesse
ventura to pep Buchanan to Ralph Nader
if you're talking about the trouble with
the Democrats and Republicans doesn't
there seem to even be more problem with
a reformed party I'm curious if in
particularly now since Ralph Nader did
get that reform nomination he didn't
choose to seek the Green Party
nomination was that a mistake would
either of you have advice for him and I
wonder do you think he may be too
egotistical to lead a party you've hit
on a pretty sensitive issue around here
at this
for Policy Studies Andy would you like
to well I I don't want to give the
impression that I was advocating a
third-party ism at this stage although I
suppose I do I mean I think that the
problem the main thing for us now I
think that the situation now anda speaks
to what Mark was saying before is that
opportunities are presenting themselves
not because of any fundamental changes
in our society but because the
Republican Party under George Bush has
created so much havoc that the that the
Republican Party which has been the main
vehicle for securing the national
security state and for enhancing the
emitter a shin of the poor and the rest
started with Democratic acquiescence but
it has been the main vehicle that that
could very well go or at least be so
severely challenged that that things are
going to change our the Democrats poised
to take advantage of it hardly certainly
not they certainly don't seem to be with
their obsession with capturing the
moderate voters in swing states is there
a chance of reforming the Democratic
Party from within which was basically
what Dennis Kucinich and how Sharpton
and maybe Carol Moseley Braun we try it
was trying to do again i think that the
prospects for that are bleak as the
situation there showed can it be changed
from outside by someone like ralph nader
well Nader at least does in a way I
think he's wrong about this in this
electoral cycle but at least in a way by
not pursuing a safe state strategy he is
and if there is a fear in on carries
part as the election draws closer that
they could lose some states to the nadir
vote he is providing some kind of
impetus for moving carry just a little
bit more to the left than he would
otherwise be you know but that's but but
it's we're not the problem is that we're
just not that strong yet and I think
that what we need to do is to work out
how to become stronger in the new period
which is presenting itself and which in
which in a way our greatest ally is
george w bush win or lose he's that's
that's what's that's what's made
openings possible well i think your
question is a very important one first
of all what is interesting now is a good
number of the generals have turned
against porsche and that's a fascinating
change in American politics where
they're prepared to speak out in a very
direct way against what Bush is done
part of it is because I think he's seen
as an imprudent imperialist and on the
other side of the coin I think they see
a Kerry as a prudent man a prudent
imperialist and they would see him as
much more competent rational and so
forth they also feel strongly that is
the generals that they're being undercut
by very stupid leadership in say
arrogant leadership inside the
department of defense when it comes to
the point that you're making there's a
rule in American politics which I
suspect may apply at this stage but
doesn't usually apply which is that a
people running for office invariably end
up on opposite sides of the fence of
each other and as the campaign goes on
both end up sounding exactly alike and
both seem to be exactly in the center in
each taking from the other what they're
thinking about that allowed for for
example nadir who I hold in the highest
regard to see to see platforms and
political parties merely as tools or
weigh stations and no more nor less I
view that as a mistake I see that again
as a mistake that goes to the heart of
how you can present a principled
position beyond yourself which is of
also manifested through a political
party the difficulty I think with
Nader's position is that he is assuming
that what he can do is catalyzed a kind
of change in the system as an individual
that he was able to do with regard to
confrontation with General Motors but
that's not happening I was just hoping
that you could come in a little bit
about the history of protest at the
conventions as we've seen large amounts
of folks demonstrating both up in Boston
and in New York well there are different
levels of protests that have occurred in
the in the 1930s there were huge
protests related to unemployment there
was something called the unemployment
consoles and there are some million
people who were part of the unemployment
consoles and they did a very great deal
of protesting both elections and on the
streets and so forth the fact was that
during that period protests and in
American history generally but during
that period especially they were quite
violent in other words in some cases
they would take over state capitals and
they would sit there this had occurred
in Minnesota for example in North Dakota
in terms of the demonstrations in recent
years the the demonstration of course
that the Democratic Party convention was
turned out to be quite
brutal I know something about it because
I attempted to start a party then kawaii
are you referring to 1968 called the new
party but the people on the streets at
that point really would have none of
that and they were interested in getting
arrested confronting the Democratic
Party on the other side of the coin
Mayor Daley was very much into getting
even with the people who were
demonstrating and he was trying to prove
that indeed he could control that city
and he was less interested in what would
happen to the Democratic Party and to
Hubert Humphrey than he was to make
clear that he could patrol the city why
don't we take one more question hi thank
you I was wondering I guess I might be
able to guess Andy's answer from what he
was talking about earlier but do you see
a change in the two-party system in the
United States and if so would that
happen suddenly with the demise of one
of the major parties or would have
happened slowly with implementations of
policies like Instant Runoff voting and
other policies that allow third parties
to compete on a national level well
that's a question that should be
addressed to a younger person not to me
in other words I look back and look at
the present i can only speculate and
hope about you know what should happen
obviously some things come as I've
suggested from major events for example
if it's the case the nuclear weapon goes
off someplace in the world or the United
States begins using nuclear weapons that
will cause a major shift inside American
life if it's the case that crisis occurs
in the economic system that that both
simultaneously goes to inflation and
depression that causes a profound
institutional decomposition if you are
asking me the question can things move
slowly that way I'm not so sure because
I am struck by the fact that the
situation in this country is is open to
mass manipulation indeed
we've learned over the last few years
that a lot of a lot of votes don't get
counted and the reality of the matter is
that unless there's constitutional
change the electoral college makes clear
that this is not a democracy this is at
best a republic so there has to be major
shifts in my view in the structure
itself beyond the parties Thank You
Marcus Raskin and thank you also andy
levine for being our guest today I also
want to thank people who have tuned into
this program and for those of you who
don't know very much about the institute
for policy studies I want to share that
we are an organization that for over 40
years has been linking scholarship with
activism we do research we do education
that's linked to social movements
starting with the civil rights movement
in the 60s the women's movement and
these days with the peace and global
justice movements I want to highlight
just in one second part of our work that
we're very proud of and that is that for
nearly 30 years we have been struggling
to bring justice for the victims of
jalan dictator augusto pinochet it's
been a long struggle we got involved
because two of our colleagues were
assassinated by agents of Pinochet right
here in Washington DC in 1976 by a car
bomb we've been working with people
around the world to hold Pinochet
accountable for these crimes and we are
celebrating today because the Chilean
Supreme Court has stripped Pinochet of
his immunity from prosecution and he now
appears to be headed to trial and I want
to congratulate my colleague Marcus
Raskin who has been central to this
struggle for so many years i also want
to and I sincerely mean that he has been
on the front lines of those battles if
people want more information about the
institute for policy studies you can go
to our website let me give out the web
address it's w wips hyphen dcor gee
that's IPS hyphen dcor g we have a great
study on that website about the cost of
war we've documented the cost for
Americans Iraqis and people around the
world
next year next week we'll have a great
new study out about CEO pay at companies
that are leading the trend of
outsourcing service jobs to low-wage
countries and there's lots of other
great information on there I'll get the
website one more time it's IPS hyphen
dcor G and thank you once again our
panelists Marcus Raskin and Andy Levine
as well as our audience here in
Washington our listeners on Pacifica
Radio and our viewers on c-span thanks
again i'm sarah anderson
what you're saying about the Republicans
is making sense
quiet but
sure
staying over at one